Question about the other benefits besides pay. I
mean, you said just a minute ago that you weren't
interested in pay when you were... Well, that
wasn't your main objective. I don't think that up
until 1963 you're really interested in what the
job was to be done. And I had so many fantastic jobs
by, I was just enthusiastic about the Air Force.
And getting back to Massawa, after I shipped all
these people home, the re-enlistment rate at
Massawa jumped to about three percent. I mean,
three times. Really? Oh yeah, because
Even though you were kind of a hard nose, did it
sound like? Oh, yeah. Because they figured they
had a mission. And they were interested. And of
course, we're getting off of pay, but... Another
thing we set up was an educational program at the
University of Maryland I think came in and set up
schools there. And you encourage all these young
men instead of going down to the beer garden why
they go to school at night. And they could get the
first two years of college out of the way by going to
night school at Masato. and you could raise their
work schedule so that they could always attend
school. So you're greatly involved in doing a good
job and knowing you're doing a good job and so
you're really not interested in and you were
getting pretty well paid. See when I got promoted
to full colonel By 1942 you had nine years service
and you were full colonel until 57. Your pay was
pretty good all during those years anyway.
The only thing I say is today where there is more
emphasis on pay and benefits that there were a lot
more people talking about it. And therefore, more
people are setting the standard that you have to
pay the military more than they're now being paid.
And well, when the Department of Labor, I think
it's the Department of Labor, establishes that
you have to make $9,600 to be above the poverty
level, and you have a third of your military making
less than that, why then everybody in the military
thinks they're in the poverty level.
But that doesn't of course take into account the
other benefits Well, you have... You do have a
considerable amount of benefits in the armed
forces where you don't get those in business.
Often you don't have those in business. Well...
Let's go back to this one again. What I'd like to do
is, when did you start thinking about this
differential in pay and when did you start
thinking that it was becoming a problem? have not
been able to keep your best young commanders in.
Well, it wasn't a problem while I was in the
service. In fact, it wasn't a problem that you
really get to looking at it until you get into the
building business and you get to realize how much
some people are making. I see, yeah, right, yeah.
See, you really haven't... you really don't know.
You look at somebody and you don't know if he's
making $60,000 or $80,000 or whether or not he's
making $18,000.
You don't know that. When you get into a position
where you get to know how much various people are
making in the various occupations, why you just
get to the point that that
the commanders and managers in the military are
just way underpaid.
realize this during the 1950s when the Air Force
was expanding did you know people who were
colonels and generals who were getting out of the
service instead of staying in 30 years they were
getting out early they were getting out after 20
years because they could get a better paying job?
No
I don't really remember of any particular
instance where individuals were getting out.
Sometimes a general officer would get an offer of a
good civilian job and he would retire
twenty-seven year service or something of this
sort. But see the twenty year retirement, I don't
remember when it exactly came in, but it hasn't
been in very much before I retired.
But I would say that you're...
See, when I went and got in the Air Force, you had all
kinds of jobs. And now, you get into specifics
where you have an individual who does nothing but
fly. Now, maybe he flies every third day. And he has
two days, maybe one day, that he has to brush up on
his missions. And he has another day of doing
nothing. I mean, this is whereas we don't use this
talent in part-time jobs.
What do you mean by that? I don't think I
understand. Well, OK. My son-in-law was a
navigator. And he was stationed in Hawaii when we
were there. And that's where he met my wife. oldest
daughter, and he was a navigator. And he maybe flew
a mission once every two days, or three days, I mean
every three or four days. While he was on the
ground, he didn't have anything to do because he
was on call for a mission. Well, he could spend so
much time taking University of Maryland courses,
college courses, But what do you do the rest of the
time? And we don't spend enough time of developing
part-time jobs so that he could be a supply officer
or something else that would be productive for him
during his off time, during his eight hour a day
work day. OK, that brings me to another question.
You said that when you were the commander of the
39th Air Division, here you are up in northern
Japan. And you're snowed in pretty much of the
winter. And it's probably fairly cold and
miserable up there. You had things set up for the
men and officers, such as the University of
Maryland night courses. What other type of
entertainment or after duty programs did you have
or did you try to develop any of these programs so
these people would have something to do? Well, you
develop
bowling alleys. Did you build some bowling
alleys? Well, we may have had them there. We had
quite an extensive
special service programs, a bowling alley. Then
you had your basketball, both your high school
basketball and your base basketball teams, and
that you had visiting teams come in or visiting
high school teams come in. And you had an extensive
youth program of teaching the high school kids of
how to shoot a rifle, for example. And we gave them
dancing lessons and ceramic lessons. And my
oldest daughter took painting lessons from a
professional Japanese painter in oils. And so you
set up a lot of... swimming,
indoor swimming pool, and you teach everybody how
to swim.
So you had a really extensive youth program to keep
out of trouble. But to get everybody involved in
some kind of activity is most difficult. Because
some of them just don't want to do anything. Any
directed activity. They want to do what they want
to do. And then you of course have an extensive
library so that people who are readers can read.
What about liberty? What kind of liberty sections
did you have? What do you mean liberty? they worked
basically in Japan they worked eight to four or
eight to five days something like that and then how
often would they have the duty to stay on all night
on the base all night? Oh not very much. Normally
you left that up to your squaring commanders where
you like Christmas by you had required to keep say
fifty percent of your of his squadron on base and
then you just depend on him to
manage it. You really didn't, then you had alert
aircraft and that was on a roster basis.
So the officers and men then got plenty of time off?
Yeah, they'd get plenty of time off. Not in Japan,
up in Misawa, unless you go down to Tokyo. You
didn't have a lot of off-base activities.
Okay, now let's go to your next duty assignment.
You said you got your next duty assignment because
you did a good job up in Missawa. Basically, what
did you do as the Deputy for Plans and Operations of
Pacific Air Force Hawaii? Well, that... involved
just about what I wrote out there. Advising the
commander. Well, see the fifth of the PACAF
headquarters was organized where you had a
commander and you had a vice commander and then you
had two deputies. And then the entire staff were
under those two deputies so that in your chain of
command You had operations, flying safety,
anything that had to do with the flying program,
and anything to do with the plans program. Those
were under your direction. And then you had
underneath you, then you had a director of plans
and you had a director of operations. And then you
dealt through them as far as the staff is
concerned. Who was it? How about cutting that off
now? So basically, then, we have four generals who
are running the Fifth Air Force. Well, you're also
your- Is that the chain of command? Well, also you
had-
My deputy for operations was also a brigadier
general. Oh, I see. So you were a senior brigadier,
and he was a junior. Yeah. And then your director of
plans was also a, if the slot was a brigadier
general. At the time, he wasn't a brigadier. He was
a colonel. But normally, he was occupying a BG
slot. And see, I was occupying a major general
slot. Then the commander was a four star and the
vice commander was a three star. And then you had
two two stars. And then under this other side,
under logistics, while you had the
surgeon was a brigadier general, he had a number of
brigadier generals underneath him.
Who was, at this time, who was your general? Well,
General O'Donnell, Rosie O'Donnell, was the
commander. He was a four star? He was a four star.
And then you had General Moorman, who was a
classmate of mine from West Point, was a three
star. And then I was underneath any of them. Why
weren't you promoted to a two-star then? Well, see
this was getting down to the point, and this is
rationalizing I would say, that
you were getting down to the point where you had
twenty-eight year service. At that time I had
twenty-eight year service. And the Air Force
promotes their individuals rather early. And
according to just rumors that I'd been told by
another classmate that at that stage the Air Force
just wasn't promoting anybody to a
higher grade. because that would, you'd just get
more retired pay and things of this sort. Anyway,
why,
I didn't really think about retiring at all,
because when I was brought into PACF
headquarters, why, General O'Donnell was
positive that he could get me promoted. That's
what he told you? Yeah, and
so that, I didn't prepare for retirement. As far as
I was concerned, as long as I was on active duty, I
didn't prepare myself at all for any retirement
job and for retirement life because I was too busy
doing a military job.
And these are both of the The director of the deputy
for operations and plans is an extremely
responsible guy. It's a staff job, as you
understand it. You prepare operational orders
and send them out for execution, the 5th Air Force.
And the 5th Air Force in turn sends it down to the air
divisions. And you prepare all kinds of plans for
various types of emergencies. and you go out and
inspect probably twice a year. All the different
bases? All the different bases. And how can you
differentiate between your job as the deputy for
plans and operations and then your next job in 1962
and 63 as the deputy for administration and
logistics?
In other words, you were switching from one of the
deputies to another deputy. Well, the reason for
that is the operations and plans job is probably
the most important one. In view of the fact that I
wasn't going to get promoted by General O'Donnell
had made available to him a a major general that he
particularly wanted. So I had the choice of either
I could retire at that time
or I could move over and take this other plans and
logistics job for the remaining one year I had
before retiring. When you learned that you
weren't going to be promoted, what were your
feelings? Well, your ego gets pretty well
tarnished.
I didn't go into the darks of depression or
anything. I enjoyed my job over in administration
logistics. It was a real high-powered job. more
the business side of running a Far East PACAF
headquarters, Pacific Air Forces, than the plans
and operations. Because all of your
justification before the air staff in Washington
on how much money you needed to run the PACAF
command, had to be justified. You had to prepare
all kinds of documents that way. The
personnel that you got followed through your
director of personnel. So it's really, on that
side, it's more of the business side of running a
big corporation than the plans and operations.
That would prepare you then for civilian duties.
Yeah, you would think so. And did you think about
that? No, you really don't. As far as I was
concerned, I really didn't think about retiring
until about three months before retiring and
decide what you're going to do. And you really have
no, you don't know what you're going to do. I mean,
you never thought about it, what you're going to
do. And you have a lot of major problems in
retiring. at age 55 with I
guess your ego that you're pretty good. And so you
say, well what am I going to do? You have a job here of
dividing up say $200 million in 1963 among various
bases and activities and what have you. And you
have all kinds of funds. You have 750 staff
personnel. And you're taking care of about
100,000 people at 20 air bases. So that's a big job.
And then you retire. And
you say, well, boy, I should be able to run General
Dynamics.
And so you start looking for a job, and that's a
completely different story, I'm sure. We're
going to talk about your retirement in a bit.
It's rather interesting to me that here you are at a
top staff position, 1963.
Vietnam is just starting to wind up. Kennedy is
ascending. 15,000 advisors into Vietnam in 1963.
We hadn't started the bombing yet. That didn't
come until 1965. But the Air Force, and especially
the Fifth Air Force, must have. Were you at all
involved with any of the early? Can you tell me
about that, your experience, your involvement in
Vietnam? No, I was in Vietnam and had gone all over
Vietnam. Well, I don't know whether
it's—somewhere in between 61 and 63. I mean it was
while I was in one of those jobs. And of course we had
some
activity.
establishing training programs for the
Vietnamese pilots and discussion of technical
schools, whether or not you bring them back to the
United States and train your mechanics and radio
operators and all the other people. I would say the
big decision that
which was a controversy, is whether or not you
teach, you write the training manuals in
Vietnamese and let them learn in their native
language or whether or not you bring all these
people back to the States and teach them English
first and then let them learn from the books
written in English.
in the headquarters there why there were two
proposals. One of them is, as far as I was
concerned, we should establish a technical
school in Vietnam and write the books in
Vietnamese. That was your opinion? That was my
opinion. It
seemed to me it would have been a lot easier to do it
that way and not have these people coming back,
flowing back to the states in vast numbers and
taking so much longer time to be trained. But the
way that the Air Force was doing it worldwide was
bringing the indigenous personnel back to the
states, teach them English, and then let them go
through our technical schools. That's the way it
was going to run. And did you put in a proposal to set
up a technical school? That was in the
headquarters, and I don't think it ever got beyond
the headquarters. That would have been, just an
aside here, that would have been an excellent job
for you. Well, I had a good job. No, seriously
though, because you had had so much experience in
setting up schools. Did you ever think of that? No,
I never did. Well, the thing about it, by that time,
and not getting promoted, I knew I was going to
retire. So it just wasn't worth the while to get
involved in a technical training school or
command or what have you at that time. Do you
remember any high-level discussions besides
this issue? Do you remember any other high-level
discussions about Vietnam at Fifth Air Force
Headquarters? You mean at PACAF Headquarters?
Yeah. Well, I attended most of the meetings
that—let's see, you have Pacific Air Forces and
you have Pacific PACOM, which is Pacific Command.
Now that was at the time— was run by a Navy
four-star admiral. And of course that was an
integrated command, had Army, Air Force,
Marines, Navy running it. And the generals in
Vietnam reported to him. The generals in Vietnam
reported to him. So did you sit in at some of those
meetings? Oh yeah, well I was... I was involved in
most of the plans in Vietnam, and of course I think
it's known that we the politicians just
controlled Vietnam War to the extent that it was a
no-win situation. And was that the basic feeling?
Now think back 1961 through 1963. I know that I'm
sure that you feel that way today, but is that what
you felt back then? That the politicians were
controlling you too much? Well you had two
situations. One of them is you had the Army trying
to control the
jungle warfare. They wanted their primary
mission to be jungle warfare. And of course you had
the Air Force
having most of the airplanes and the pilots. and
you had the Army still trying to get back their
close support airplanes.
They figured that they could do a better job than
the Air Force was doing. So they had some inner
service right there. Yeah, but most of your
proposals were expansion, and of course it did
expand, but it still didn't expand as much as the
Air Force would have liked to at the time because
if you go over and visit Vietnam it was so
primitive. I mean you go back in the backwoods and
the natives were still throwing spears. I mean
they were armed with spears.
and bows and arrows type of thing. And these
mountaineers, I mean they were tough cookies, but
they just didn't have the armament,
the guns and what have you, and probably were
pretty close to untrainable. The guns that we
provided them, whatever the MPO rifle or whatever
the type of rifle that we provided them, the stock
was just too long for them to get it up under, get it
up to the shoulder. I mean they were small people.
And so they had to hold it like I did when I was 12
years old. Dad's 12 gauge, 10 gauge shotgun. You
hold it under your underarm and you try to shoot it.
And they were very, very primitive people. You
just can't imagine how primitive a major part of
the Vietnamese people were. If we couldn't lick
them with
all our modern tanks and what have you, we'd better
quit.
just build it up so gradually that you really go in
in a no-win situation. And I think we, at the time,
we were voicing the same opinion. And I think the
military, during that period of time, were trying
to expand the war to win the war. Now,
specifically, why were you sent to Vietnam? What
was your mission? Well, I went over there on a staff
visit
to visit all of the air bases that were in existence
for use by
our own Air Force and also the Vietnamese Air
Force. How many air bases did we have in 1962? We
had, I think we had two that were finished and we
were building about two others or three others.
And then of course I met General LeMay over there
when he came over there for a visit and somewhere in
my files I have a report that I read and wrote after
his visit. He came, he flew in, he was chief of staff
at the airports at the time and he came in to look
over
And he flew around.